GitHub Actions Workflows
========================

FastForward DevTools provides a set of reusable GitHub Actions workflows that automate testing, documentation generation, and wiki synchronization. These workflows are synchronized into consumer repositories via the ``dev-tools:sync`` command.

Workflow Inheritance
--------------------

Workflows in consumer repositories (located in ``.github/workflows/``) are typically "thin wrappers" that inherit logic from the central ``dev-tools`` repository.

Example of an inherited workflow:

.. code-block:: yaml

    name: "Fast Forward Reports"
    uses: php-fast-forward/dev-tools/.github/workflows/reports.yml@main
    secrets: inherit

This approach ensures that all libraries in the ecosystem benefit from infrastructure updates without requiring manual changes to every repository.

For the protected-branch-safe preview and publish model, see
:doc:`../advanced/branch-protection-and-bot-commits`.

Fast Forward Reports
--------------------

The ``reports.yml`` workflow is responsible for generating technical documentation and quality reports.

**Triggers:**
*   Push to ``main``.
*   Pull Request (opened, synchronized, reopened, closed).
*   Manual trigger (workflow_dispatch).

**Behavior:**
*   **Main Branch**: Runs all checks and deploys the final reports to the root of the ``gh-pages`` branch.
    *   Runs a post-deploy health check against the published reports index and coverage URLs with retry/backoff to account for Pages propagation.
    *   Resolves the workflow PHP version from ``composer.lock`` or ``composer.json`` before installing dependencies.
*   **Pull Requests**:
    *   Generates a **Preview** of the documentation, coverage, and metrics.
    *   Deploys the preview to ``gh-pages`` under ``previews/pr-{number}/``.
    *   Verifies the preview index and coverage URLs after deployment before posting preview links.
    *   Posts a **Sticky Comment** on the PR with links to the live preview, coverage report, and metrics site.
    *   **Cleanup**: When a PR is closed, the workflow automatically removes the preview directory from the ``gh-pages`` branch to keep the repository clean.
    *   **Concurrency**: New pushes to the same PR cancel older in-progress preview runs without affecting other PRs.
*   **Scheduled Cleanup**: A scheduled/manual cleanup removes stale ``previews/pr-{number}/`` directories for already closed pull requests.

Fast Forward Wiki
-----------------

The ``wiki.yml`` workflow synchronizes the documentation generated by the ``dev-tools wiki`` command with the GitHub Wiki repository.

**Behavior:**
*   **Submodule Management**: It manages a submodule at ``.github/wiki`` that points to the actual wiki repository.
*   **Pull Requests**: Pushes documentation changes to a dedicated branch (e.g., ``pr-123``) in the wiki repository for review.
*   **PHP Version Resolution**: Resolves the PHP version from ``composer.lock`` or ``composer.json`` before setting up PHP and installing dependencies.
*   **Merge**: When a PR is merged into ``main``, it pushes the changes to the ``master`` branch of the wiki, validates the remote branch SHA, and makes them live.
*   **Cleanup**: When a PR is closed, the workflow deletes the matching wiki preview branch. A scheduled cleanup also removes stale ``pr-{number}`` branches for already closed pull requests.

.. note::
   See :doc:`../configuration/repository-setup` for mandatory initial setup required for the Wiki workflow to function.
   See :doc:`../advanced/branch-protection-and-bot-commits` for branch
   protection, bot commit, and submodule pointer conflict guidance.

Fast Forward Tests
------------------

The ``tests.yml`` workflow provides standard Continuous Integration.

*   Runs PHPUnit tests across the supported PHP matrix.
*   Resolves the minimum supported PHP minor version from ``composer.lock`` or ``composer.json`` and builds the test matrix from that floor upward.
*   Runs dependency health as a separate non-blocking job when enabled.
*   Uses PR-scoped concurrency so newer pushes cancel older in-progress runs for the same pull request.

Fast Forward Changelog
----------------------

The ``changelog.yml`` workflow validates pull-request changelog updates and
automates the release-preparation flow for repositories that use the local
changelog commands. Consumer repositories typically expose it through the thin
wrapper in ``resources/github-actions/changelog.yml``.

**Triggers:**
*   Pull Request (opened, synchronized, reopened).
*   Pull Request Target (closed) for merged release-preparation pull requests.
*   Manual trigger (workflow_dispatch).

**Behavior:**
*   **Pull Requests**:
    *   Resolves the workflow PHP version from ``composer.lock`` or
        ``composer.json`` before installing dependencies.
    *   Uses ``fetch-depth: 0`` so the base branch reference can be compared
        safely.
    *   Fetches the base branch changelog reference.
    *   Runs ``composer dev-tools changelog:check -- --against=<base-ref>`` against the base ref.
    *   Fails when the current branch does not add a meaningful ``Unreleased`` change.
*   **Manual Release Preparation**:
    *   Checks out the repository default branch with full history.
    *   Resolves the next version from ``Unreleased`` unless a version input is provided.
    *   Promotes ``Unreleased`` into the selected version with the current UTC release date.
    *   Writes a release-notes preview file to ``.dev-tools/release-notes.md`` with
        ``composer dev-tools changelog:show -- <version>``.
    *   Opens or updates a release-preparation pull request instead of committing directly to ``main``.
*   **Merged Release Pull Requests**:
    *   Detects merged branches that match the configured release branch prefix.
    *   Renders the released changelog section with ``composer dev-tools changelog:show -- <version>``.
    *   Creates or updates the Git tag and GitHub release with the rendered changelog section as the release body.

**Inputs:**
*   ``changelog-file``: managed changelog path, default ``CHANGELOG.md``.
*   ``version``: optional explicit version for manual release preparation.
*   ``release-branch-prefix``: release branch prefix, default ``release/v``.

Maintenance Workflows
---------------------

*   **Auto Assign**: Automatically assigns reviewers to PRs.
*   **Label Sync**: Synchronizes repository labels with ecosystem standards.
